readme.md, before:

# Daily alerts for Major League Baseball games
### A project that uses Airflow and AWS (EC2, Lambda and SNS) to send an automated alert about today's Yankee game

<p>As a developer and New York Yankees fan, I wanted to practice my data engineering skills by setting up a daily alert that would give me info about today's upcoming Yankee game.
This project uses Apache Airflow, an open-source orchestration tool developed by Airbnb, along with several Amazon Web Services (EC2, Lambda and SNS) to send a daily alert. 

To get the data needed, I use an API for Major League Baseball stats, and I webscrape [FiveThirtyEight's MLB games predictions page](https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2023-mlb-predictions/games/) in order to show the odds of the Yankees winning. The resulting message looks similar to this:
</p>

![image](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/42d2d335-4dc1-415f-9307-637fd22dd62e)

### Data pipeline
![Flowcharts (1)](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/994d5f54-49cf-42d3-8510-27c503729620)


### MLB API
<p>In order to efficiently call MLB stats data, I leveraged a popular [Python wrapper for MLB's API](https://pypi.org/project/MLB-StatsAPI/), created by Todd Roberts. The Python wrapper allows me to directly call MLB's API for important data needed for my alert: </p>
- Wins
- Losses
- Games back of first place
- Who the Yankees are playing
- Which ballpark they are playing in
- Starting pitchers
- Game time


### FiveThirtyEight webscraping
<p> FiveThirtyEight is known primarily for its data-based journalism and political polling aggregation, however it is also a great resource for seeing predictions on games in all major sports, including Major League Baseball. On gamedays, FiveThirtyEight will post chance of winning odds, as shown in the far-right column in the image below:</p>

![FiveThirtyEight](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/5d10046f-1a3d-44c4-b858-bebd565b55fe)

Using two popular Python libraries, I scrape FiveThirtyEight's website in order to automatically pull the Yankees' odds of winning on today's date, which later is brought into my email essage.

### Airflow Dag
<p> As an open-source orchestration tool, Airflow serves as a great way to schedule and execute all tasks needed in order to pull my data and organize it for my message. It's workflow can be summarized by the following steps: </p>

1. Start directed acyclic graph (dag).
2. Call MLB's API to get today's games data (i.e. who is playing today).

3. Check if there is a Yankee game today. If not, end dag. If there is, then proceed to next step.

4. Call MLB's standings data to get teams' wins, losses and games back.

5. Scrape FiveThirtyEight's website to get Yankees' probability of winning.
6. Create a Postgres SQL table that will organize all of our data.
7. Write a SQL insert query for our data.
8. Execute the insert query.
9. Send the Postgres table data to a csv and place in an S3 bucket.
10. Delete Xcoms data (Xcoms is local storage used for our Airflow dag).
11. End dag.

<p>Here is the screenshot of my dag: </p>

![dag](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/d62a4a6d-c270-43b9-95ef-c00cd9bab423)

### Setup
In order for my project to work, I needed to set up the infrastructure, which included the following:
- EC2
    - Set up a t2.large instance on Ubuntu distribution of Linux.
    - Attached a 20 GiB volume.

- Airflow
    - Set up on EC2 using docker compose.
        - "Data with Marc" has [this great tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTaytcxy2Ck) on how to do this.
    - Created connections to our docker container postgres database and to AWS, so that we can send data to S3.

- S3 bucket
    - Created an S3 bucket that would hold a CSV of our data and trigger a lambda function whenever it is updated.

- Lambda function to compose and trigger message
    - Set up a lambda function that would be triggered whenever the source S3 bucket is updated.
    - Lambda function would trigger a message sent to SNS topic.

- SNS
    - Created a topic and subscribed my personal email, so that whenever the topic is triggered by Lambda, I would receive an email.

- Lambda function to start and stop EC2 instance (optional)
    - Created two lambda functions that would automatically stop and start my EC2 instance at times of day I define in AWS EventBridge.
    - By doing this, I save money on EC2 costs, as I only need to run it for about 20 minutes per day, rather than 24 hours per day.

### Conclusion
<p>While this is not my first project that involves Airflow, Lambda and EC2, this project did give me good opportunity to deepen my knowledge of those tools using a fun topic like baseball. I became much more comfortable with setting up Airflow from scratch, and with using BeautifulSoup to scrape websites. Also, I learned how to increase my EC2 cost savings by setting up automatic start and stop lambda functions.</p>

<p>Given the trivial cost of keeping these alerts running, I plan to keep this automated alert running throughout the season, so that I can stay up-to-date with Yankee games this year.</p>

Commit message:

Included text message screenshot and language

readme.md, after:

# Daily alerts for Major League Baseball games
### A project that uses Airflow and AWS (EC2, Lambda and SNS) to send an automated alert about today's Yankee game

<p>As a developer and New York Yankees fan, I wanted to practice my data engineering skills by setting up a daily alert that would give me info about today's upcoming Yankee game.
This project uses Apache Airflow, an open-source orchestration tool developed by Airbnb, along with several Amazon Web Services (EC2, Lambda and SNS) to send a daily alert via email and text. 

To get the data needed, I use an API for Major League Baseball stats, and I webscrape [FiveThirtyEight's MLB games predictions page](https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2023-mlb-predictions/games/) in order to show the odds of the Yankees winning. The resulting email and text messages look like this:
</p>

![image](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/42d2d335-4dc1-415f-9307-637fd22dd62e)

![screenshot phone text message](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/ad7d1ec0-d31c-42e3-88b1-9c4efd9d6e01)

### Data pipeline
![Flowcharts (1)](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/994d5f54-49cf-42d3-8510-27c503729620)


### MLB API
<p>In order to efficiently call MLB stats data, I leveraged a popular [Python wrapper for MLB's API](https://pypi.org/project/MLB-StatsAPI/), created by Todd Roberts. The Python wrapper allows me to directly call MLB's API for important data needed for my alert: </p>
- Wins
- Losses
- Games back of first place
- Who the Yankees are playing
- Which ballpark they are playing in
- Starting pitchers
- Game time


### FiveThirtyEight webscraping
<p> FiveThirtyEight is known primarily for its data-based journalism and political polling aggregation, however it is also a great resource for seeing predictions on games in all major sports, including Major League Baseball. On gamedays, FiveThirtyEight will post chance of winning odds, as shown in the far-right column in the image below:</p>

![FiveThirtyEight](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/5d10046f-1a3d-44c4-b858-bebd565b55fe)

Using two popular Python libraries, I scrape FiveThirtyEight's website in order to automatically pull the Yankees' odds of winning on today's date, which later is brought into my email/text message.

### Airflow Dag
<p> As an open-source orchestration tool, Airflow serves as a great way to schedule and execute all tasks needed in order to pull my data and organize it for my message. It's workflow can be summarized by the following steps: </p>

1. Start directed acyclic graph (dag).
2. Call MLB's API to get today's games data (i.e. who is playing today).

3. Check if there is a Yankee game today. If not, end dag. If there is, then proceed to next step.

4. Call MLB's standings data to get teams' wins, losses and games back.

5. Scrape FiveThirtyEight's website to get Yankees' probability of winning.
6. Create a Postgres SQL table that will organize all of our data.
7. Write a SQL insert query for our data.
8. Execute the insert query.
9. Send the Postgres table data to a csv and place in an S3 bucket.
10. Delete Xcoms data (Xcoms is local storage used for our Airflow dag).
11. End dag.

<p>Here is the screenshot of my dag: </p>

![dag](https://github.com/DElwell90/baseball-project/assets/26678347/d62a4a6d-c270-43b9-95ef-c00cd9bab423)

### Setup
In order for my project to work, I needed to set up the infrastructure, which included the following:
- EC2
    - Set up a t2.large instance on Ubuntu distribution of Linux.
    - Attached a 20 GiB volume.

- Airflow
    - Set up on EC2 using docker compose.
        - "Data with Marc" has [this great tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aTaytcxy2Ck) on how to do this.
    - Created connections to our docker container postgres database and to AWS, so that we can send data to S3.

- S3 bucket
    - Created an S3 bucket that would hold a CSV of our data and trigger a lambda function whenever it is updated.

- Lambda function to compose and trigger message
    - Set up a lambda function that would be triggered whenever the source S3 bucket is updated.
    - Lambda function would trigger a message sent to SNS topic.

- SNS
    - Created a topic and subscribed my personal email address and phone number, so that whenever the topic is triggered by Lambda, I would receive an email and text.

- Lambda function to start and stop EC2 instance (optional)
    - Created two lambda functions that would automatically stop and start my EC2 instance at times of day I define in AWS EventBridge.
    - By doing this, I save money on EC2 costs, as I only need to run it for about 20 minutes per day, rather than 24 hours per day.

### Conclusion
<p>While this is not my first project that involves Airflow, Lambda and EC2, this project did give me good opportunity to deepen my knowledge of those tools using a fun topic like baseball. I became much more comfortable with setting up Airflow from scratch, and with using BeautifulSoup to scrape websites. Also, I learned how to increase my EC2 cost savings by setting up automatic start and stop lambda functions.</p>

<p>Given the trivial cost of keeping these alerts running, I plan to keep this automated alert running throughout the season, so that I can stay up-to-date with Yankee games this year.</p>
